---
layout: post
title:  Listcomp vs genexp
date:   2022-09-28
description: Why you should use genexp whenever it is possible.
tags: python
categories: sample-posts
---

# Listcomp vs genexp

This post explains the pros and the cons of list comprehensions (*listcomps*) compared to generator expressions (*genexps*).


<p> <br> </p>
### Table of content

* What are list comprehensions and generator expression ?
* Comparisons.
* Conclusion.

<p> <br> </p>
## 1. What are list comprehensions and generator expressions ?

*Listcomp:*

To build a list from scratch, the simpliest way is to start from an empty list and to fill it iteratively using the append method:

```python 
>>> listcomp=[]
>>> for _ in range(10):
>>>     listcomp.append(_)
>>> listcomp
[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]
>>> _
9
```

A quick way to build the same list is to use another syntax called listcomp. It is more readable but introduce a local scope where variables are only defined inside the brackets.

```python 
>>> listcomp=[_ for _ in range(10)]
>>> listcomp
[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]
>>> _ 
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
NameError: name '_' is not defined
```

-------------------------
Genexp:

To build tuples, arrays or other types of sequences, a similar syntax called genexp exist. The only syntax difference is that instead of using brackets, it uses parentheses. Pragramtically, unlike with listcomp, items are not created all in one when the object is build, they are yielded one by one.

```python 
>>> genexp=(_ for _ in range(10))
>>> genexp
<generator object <genexpr> at ...>
>>> next(genexp)
0
>>> next(genexp)
1
```

<p> <br> </p>
## 2. Comparisons

*Time to build:*

To find what is the fastest between listcomp and genexp, we use the timeit module. It takes as input a small code to execute and the number of time it has to be executed. We have created a listcomp and a genexp containing 10k elements and we have executed the code 100k times. We see that:

```python
>>> time_listcomp=timeit.timeit(stmt='listcomp=[_ for _ in range(10_000)]', number=100_000)
>>> time_genexp=timeit.timeit(stmt='genexp=(_ for _ in range(10_000))', number=100_000)
>>> round(time_listcomp / time_genexp * 100)
50597
```

Impressively, the listcomp takes 50k times more times than the genexp to be build. To have a fair comparison, we compare both approaches using different object size. We obtain the following curve:

<div class="row mt-1">
    <div class="col-sm">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/Blog/2022-09-28/time_comparison.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Time ratio between listcomp and genexp object creation.
</div>

----------------

*Memory consumption:*

In terms of memory, since the genexp generates only items on demand, it might be more memory efficient compared to listexp that creates every items. Let's check it now:

<div class="row mt-1">
    <div class="col-sm">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/Blog/2022-09-28/size_comparison.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Memory ratio between listcomp and genexp.
</div>

<p> <br> </p>
## 3. Conclusion

It appears that genexps are both more memory and time efficient compare to listexp. However, fundamentally, they do not produce the same object: listcomps generate lists so they contain many usefull magic methods such as: \__getitem__, \__len__, etc. and genexps generate generators so they are adapted when we do not need to have acess at any time all the elements of the object.